test_runner: add snapshot testing (#53169)
nodejs/node: doc/api/test.md

});
```

## Snapshot testing

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

Snapshot tests allow arbitrary values to be serialized into string values and
compared against a set of known good values. The known good values are known as
snapshots, and are stored in a snapshot file. Snapshot files are managed by the

> test runner, but are designed to be human readable to aid in debugging. Snapshot
> files should be checked into source control along with your test files. In order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
test runner, but are designed to be human readable to aid in debugging. Best practice is for snapshot
files to be checked into source control along with your test files. In order
```
I think better to recommend this instead of saying it "should be"

> to enable snapshot testing, Node.js must be started with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to enable snapshot testing, Node.js should be started with the
```
not sure about all these documentation fixes, I am not a native English speaker so feel free to resolve these without changing.

Author: "Must" implies that something has to be done. "Should" implies that it is probably best to do it, but it is not a requirement. In this case, I think "must" is correct because the APIs will not be available without the CLI flag.

Reviewer 2: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119

> test runner, but are designed to be human readable to aid in debugging. Best
> practice is for snapshot files to be checked into source control along with your
> test files. In order to enable snapshot testing, Node.js must be started with
> the [`--experimental-test-snapshots`][] command-line flag.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
test runner, but are designed to be human readable to aid in debugging. We
recommend that snapshot files be checked into source control along with your
test files. In order to enable snapshot testing, Node.js must be started with
the [`--experimental-test-snapshots`][] command-line flag.
```

Author: This exact wording came from this review comment: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/53169#discussion_r1617807793

Snapshot files are generated by starting Node.js with the
[`--test-update-snapshots`][] command-line flag. A separate snapshot file is

> generated for each test entry point. By default, the snapshot file has the same

Author: So this is intended to be the main module for the current process. So if you run `node --test` and it runs `foo.test.js` and `bar.test.js`, those two files would be the entry points for their respective processes. I'm open to alternative wording here.

> generated for each test entry point. By default, the snapshot file has the same

Author: I'm good with that. The only catch is if you have two test files `foo.test.js` and `bar.test.js` and those files import any other files that define tests (for example `common.test.js`). There would be no file created for `common.test.js` because the two processes would clobber each others files.

> generated for each test entry point. By default, the snapshot file has the same

Reviewer: IMO, `test files` is more clear.

> generated for each test entry point. By default, the snapshot file has the same

Author: SGTM then.

> as `process.argv[1]` with a `.snapshot` file extension. This behavior can be

Reviewer: how does this feature behave in the REPL? should we add a test and/or document that behavior?

Author: The docs for `setResolveSnapshotPath()` mention that the path will be `undefined` in that case. There are tests where the path does not resolve to a string (it will throw in that case). If the returned path is a string but not a valid path then it will throw when trying to read/write the file (with the filename attached to the error).

can be configured using the `config.setResolveSnapshotPath()` function. Each
snapshot assertion corresponds to an export in the snapshot file.

An example snapshot test is shown below. The first time this test is executed,
it will fail because the corresponding snapshot file does not exist.

```js
// test.js
suite('suite of snapshot tests', () => {
  test('snapshot test', (t) => {
    t.assert.snapshot({ value1: 1, value2: 2 });
    t.assert.snapshot(5);
  });
});
```

Generate the snapshot file by running the test file with

> `--test-update-snapshots`. The test should pass, and a file named

Reviewer: Should we allow snapshots to be generated in case the file is absent even without `--test-update-snapshots`?

Author: My personal opinion is no. It's simpler if you either read or write snapshots, but never both.

`test.js.snapshot` is created in the same directory as the test file. The
contents of the snapshot file are shown below. Each snapshot is identified by
the full name of test and a counter to differentiate between snapshots in the
same test.

```js
exports[`suite of snapshot tests > snapshot test 1`] = `
{
  "value1": 1,

>   "value2": 2

Reviewer 4: @cjihrig It seems like this is missing backtick consistency for string values in snapshots.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean.

});
```

## `snapshot`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

An object whose methods are used to configure snapshot testing settings.

### `snapshot.setDefaultSerializers(serializers)`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

* `serializers` {Array} An array of synchronous functions used as the default
  serializers for snapshot tests.

This function is used to customize the default serialization mechanism used by
the test runner. By default, the test runner performs serialization by calling

> `JSON.stringify(value, null, 2)` on the provided value.

Reviewer 2: note that this throws on the circular reference

});
```

## `config`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

> An object whose methods are used to configure global test runner settings.

Reviewer: this will probably be very confusing when running multiple test files since it is will be required to be used in each file separately.
I don't have a better solution for this tough

Author: My assumption was that people would use a preload to configure global settings like this. That way it will work if we implement single process isolation in the future too. This is also similar to how Jest supports this kind of thing.

Reviewer: I assume that as well, but I think it should be clarified in some way that this only affects the tests in the current process. 

I can imagine people expecting this to work

```js
import { run, config } from 'node:test';
import { tap } from 'node:test/reporters';

config.setDefaultSnapshotSerializers([
  (value) => { return JSONStringify(value, null, 2); },
])
run({ files: [path.resolve('./tests/test.js')] })
 .compose(tap)
 .pipe(process.stdout);
```

Author: Good point. I'll add more docs.

});
```

## `config`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

An object whose methods are used to configure global test runner settings in the
current process. It is possible to apply the same configuration to all files by
placing common configuration code in a module preloaded with `--require` or

> `--import`.

Reviewer 3: Can this be split out of this PR? It’s come up a few times where people have wanted config files for loaders, for the test runner, for policies and probably other things. I think we should have a single solution for configuring Node via a config file that applies to all of Node’s flags/settings, and not have config files specific to subsystems.

I understand that this isn’t a flag, that this is something specific to the test runner and imported from `node:test`, but the existence of this might constrain the potential design of an all-Node config solution. For example I can imagine something akin to `--env-file` / `util.parseEnv`, like `--config` / `util.parseConfig`, and if we create `util.parseConfig` then we probably shouldn’t also have `node:test.config`.

Author: Where would you like `setResolveSnapshotPath()` and `setDefaultSnapshotSerializers()` to be imported from?

Author: The `config` object was initially named `snapshot` when I created this PR. I only renamed it to `config` because it seemed like a more general namespace for such methods.

Author: It seems like your issue is strictly with the name `config`. I'm happy to rename it to whatever.

Author: > I understand that this isn’t a flag, that this is something specific to the test runner and imported from node:test, but the existence of this might constrain the potential design of an all-Node config solution.

That would not be the case here FYI. There is some order of precedence for config between environment variables, command line flags, the hypothetical Node config file, and local configuration. This would be a local configuration that would only override more global configuration.

Reviewer 3: > Where would you like `setResolveSnapshotPath()` and `setDefaultSnapshotSerializers()` to be imported from?

Could you just do `import { setResolveSnapshotPath, setDefaultSnapshotSerializers } from 'node:test'`? Otherwise renaming `config` to `snapshot`, assuming that `snapshot` will contain only snapshot-related methods, is fine.

Yes my objection is to a new API that’s essentially “here’s a way to define broad swaths of configuration” but it’s not _all_ of Node’s configuration. I think we should have the latter, and having miniature versions for subsets of Node will get in the way of creating the bigger thing.

});
```

### `context.assert`

<!-- YAML
added:
  - v22.2.0
-->

An object containing assertion methods bound to `context`. The top-level
functions from the `node:assert` module are exposed here for the purpose of
creating test plans.

```js
test('test', (t) => {
  t.plan(1);
  t.assert.strictEqual(true, true);
});
```

#### `context.assert.snapshot(actual[, options])`

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

* `actual` {any} A value to serialize to a string. If Node.js was started with
  the [`--test-update-snapshots`][] flag, the serialized value is written to
  the snapshot file. Otherwise, the serialized value is compared to the
  corresponding value in the existing snapshot file.
* `options` {Object} Optional configuration options. The following properties
  are supported:

>   * `serializers` {Array} An array of synchronous functions used to serialize

Reviewer 2: Any reason this is an array and not a single function? Why would I call multiple serializers?

Author: It's just a bit more flexible without really adding complexity. For example if you want to serialize something using `util.inspect()`, then normalize line endings across platforms, then do something else. You could put all of that logic in a single function, but it might be easier to reason about (and reuse code) if you can use multiple functions.

Reviewer 5: I'm +1 with starting with an array, we can improve DX later

});
```

### `context.assert`

<!-- YAML
added:
  - v22.2.0
-->

An object containing assertion methods bound to `context`. The top-level
functions from the `node:assert` module are exposed here for the purpose of
creating test plans.

```js
test('test', (t) => {
  t.plan(1);
  t.assert.strictEqual(true, true);
});
```

> #### `context.assert.snapshot(actual[, options])`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `context.assert.snapshot(value[, options])`
```

<!-- YAML
added: REPLACEME
-->

> Stability: 1.0 - Early development

> * `actual` {any} A value to serialize to a string. If Node.js was started with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `value` {any} A value to serialize to a string. If Node.js was started with
```
